README.md, before:

# AEC Drawing Ontology


## Why OWL restrictions for contains

`contains` is an **object property**: it relates individuals to individuals. In OWL, class axioms describe constraints on instances. To express "Class A can contain Class B" (0 or more) at the class level, we use an **OWL restriction** with qualified cardinality:

```turtle
:Layout rdfs:subClassOf [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
                         owl:onProperty :contains ;
                         owl:minQualifiedCardinality 0 ;
                         owl:onClass :Annotation
                       ] .
```

Min cardinality 0 means "can contain" (optional). Use min ≥ 1 for "must contain".

## Annotation properties

OWL annotation properties attach metadata to classes without affecting logical reasoning. We use custom annotation properties for application-specific behaviour.

**Example: labellableRoot** — A boolean we use to mark which classes can serve as labels in diagrams. When `true`, the class is shown as a solid contour (labellable); when `false`, as a dashed contour (structural/category node). This drives filtering and styling in the visualizer and editor.

Other annotation properties (e.g. `rdfs:label`, `rdfs:comment`) follow standard OWL usage.

## Relationship examples

- **rdfs:subClassOf** — Taxonomy: e.g. `CurtainWallSystem` subClassOf `FacadeSystem`
- **contains** — Containment: e.g. a layout can contain drawing elements (via OWL restrictions)
- **hasFunction**, **hasMaterial** — Domain-specific: e.g. a facade component has a function or material

## Usage

Load with RDFlib, OWLReady2, or any OWL/RDF tool:

```python
from rdflib import Graph
g = Graph()
g.parse("ontology/aec_drawing_ontology.ttl", format="turtle")
```

## Visualizer

Generate and open an interactive graph visualization (similar to WebVOWL):

```bash
uv run python Visualizer/convert_to_html_view.py
```

Then open `Visualizer/visualizer.html` in a browser. The visualizer supports:

- **Labellable filter**: Show all nodes, only labellable, or only non-labellable
- **Edge type**: Filter by relationship type (e.g. subClassOf)
- **Node color by**: Color nodes by labellable status (green=labellable, red=non-labellable) or default
- **Reset / Fit**: Reset zoom or fit graph to screen

## Documentation

HTML documentation for all ontology files is automatically generated using [pyLODE](https://github.com/RDFLib/pyLODE).

### Automated Generation

Documentation is automatically generated and deployed to GitHub Pages whenever:
- Changes are pushed to the `main` or `master` branch
- The workflow is manually triggered from the GitHub Actions tab

The documentation is available at the repository's GitHub Pages URL (typically `https://<username>.github.io/<repository-name>/`).

### Manual Generation

To generate documentation locally:

```bash
# Install dependencies
uv sync

# Generate documentation for all TTL files in the root directory
uv run python scripts/generate_docs.py
```

The generated HTML files will be placed in the `docs/` directory. Each `.ttl` file in the repository root will have a corresponding `.html` file generated.

### Adding New Ontologies

Simply add a new `.ttl` file to the repository root. The next time the documentation workflow runs (automatically on push or manually), it will discover and document the new ontology file automatically.

Commit message:

Revise title and add description for AEC ontologies
Updated title and added a brief description of the ontologies.

README.md, after:

# AEC Drawing Ontologies

Set of ontologies representing information in AEC drawings

https://burohappoldmachinelearning.github.io/ADIRO/


## Why OWL restrictions for contains

`contains` is an **object property**: it relates individuals to individuals. In OWL, class axioms describe constraints on instances. To express "Class A can contain Class B" (0 or more) at the class level, we use an **OWL restriction** with qualified cardinality:

```turtle
:Layout rdfs:subClassOf [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
                         owl:onProperty :contains ;
                         owl:minQualifiedCardinality 0 ;
                         owl:onClass :Annotation
                       ] .
```

Min cardinality 0 means "can contain" (optional). Use min ≥ 1 for "must contain".

## Annotation properties

OWL annotation properties attach metadata to classes without affecting logical reasoning. We use custom annotation properties for application-specific behaviour.

**Example: labellableRoot** — A boolean we use to mark which classes can serve as labels in diagrams. When `true`, the class is shown as a solid contour (labellable); when `false`, as a dashed contour (structural/category node). This drives filtering and styling in the visualizer and editor.

Other annotation properties (e.g. `rdfs:label`, `rdfs:comment`) follow standard OWL usage.

## Relationship examples

- **rdfs:subClassOf** — Taxonomy: e.g. `CurtainWallSystem` subClassOf `FacadeSystem`
- **contains** — Containment: e.g. a layout can contain drawing elements (via OWL restrictions)
- **hasFunction**, **hasMaterial** — Domain-specific: e.g. a facade component has a function or material

## Usage

Load with RDFlib, OWLReady2, or any OWL/RDF tool:

```python
from rdflib import Graph
g = Graph()
g.parse("ontology/aec_drawing_ontology.ttl", format="turtle")
```

## Visualizer

Generate and open an interactive graph visualization (similar to WebVOWL):

```bash
uv run python Visualizer/convert_to_html_view.py
```

Then open `Visualizer/visualizer.html` in a browser. The visualizer supports:

- **Labellable filter**: Show all nodes, only labellable, or only non-labellable
- **Edge type**: Filter by relationship type (e.g. subClassOf)
- **Node color by**: Color nodes by labellable status (green=labellable, red=non-labellable) or default
- **Reset / Fit**: Reset zoom or fit graph to screen

## Documentation

HTML documentation for all ontology files is automatically generated using [pyLODE](https://github.com/RDFLib/pyLODE).

### Automated Generation

Documentation is automatically generated and deployed to GitHub Pages whenever:
- Changes are pushed to the `main` or `master` branch
- The workflow is manually triggered from the GitHub Actions tab

The documentation is available at the repository's GitHub Pages URL (typically `https://<username>.github.io/<repository-name>/`).

### Manual Generation

To generate documentation locally:

```bash
# Install dependencies
uv sync

# Generate documentation for all TTL files in the root directory
uv run python scripts/generate_docs.py
```

The generated HTML files will be placed in the `docs/` directory. Each `.ttl` file in the repository root will have a corresponding `.html` file generated.

### Adding New Ontologies

Simply add a new `.ttl` file to the repository root. The next time the documentation workflow runs (automatically on push or manually), it will discover and document the new ontology file automatically.
